JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
MAN: I'm glad you're sorry now.
I'm glad you're
taking action now, but it's a
little bit late
for the kids in Flint.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In a heated
hearing, members
of Congress grill Michigan
Governor Rick Snyder
and the head of the
Environmental Protection
Agency over Flint's water
crisis.
Also ahead this Thursday: next
steps in the
political battle over President
Obama's Supreme
Court pick.
And as March Madness sets in, we
look at some
of the questions surrounding
paying collegiate
athletes.
ED O'BANNON, Former UCLA
Basketball Player:
Close to 15 years later, and
they're still
making money off of my image. I
just thought
to myself, there's got to be
something wrong
about this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama's
Supreme Court
nominee, Judge Merrick Garland,
began making
the rounds on Capitol Hill
today, this in
the face of Senate Republicans
saying they
will not consider any Obama
nominee this year.
Instead, Garland started with
Minority Leader
Harry Reid and Patrick Leahy,
ranking Democrat
on the Senate Judiciary
Committee. Leahy said
the judge won't be commenting on
the political
fight.
SEN. PATRICK LEAHY (D), Vermont:
He's not
going to go out before the press
like I am
and give his side of the story.
Where he gets
his chance to say anything tell
is at a hearing,
and that's what he ought to
have.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A spokesman for
Senate Majority
Leader Mitch McConnell called
the visits a
stunt orchestrated by the White
House.
We will take a closer look at
nomination politics
in the Senate later in the
program.
In the presidential race, House
Speaker Paul
Ryan tried again to shut down
speculation
that he might agree to be the
Republican nominee
if there's a contested
convention. He said
anyone who's saying otherwise
should -- quote
-- "knock it off."
But at a weekly briefing, Ryan
also criticized
Donald Trump for warning his
supporters that
they might riot if he's close
and is still
denied the nomination.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House:
Nobody should say such things,
in my opinion,
because to even address or hint
to violence
is unacceptable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Republican
front-runner
also drew fire from Moscow. A
spokesman for
Russian President Vladimir Putin
charged that
an online ad for Trump reflects
a -- quote
-- "demonization of Russia." The
ad refers
to Putin as -- quote -- "one of
our toughest
opponents."
Separately, President Vladimir
Putin warned
today that he's prepared to send
more warplanes
and troops back to Syria if need
be. Russian
forces began a partial pullout
this week after
helping Syria's military make
major advances
in the run-up to peace talks.
At a Moscow ceremony, Putin made
clear that
he won't let those gains be
lost.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through
translator): If necessary,
literally within
a few hours, Russia can build up
its contingent
in the region to a size
proportionate to the
situation developing there and
use the entire
arsenal of capabilities at our
disposal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile,
Kurdish regions
in Northern Syria announced that
they're forming
their own federal region. The
area extends
from the eastern border with
Iraq to the cities
of Kobani and near Aleppo
farther west. The
Syrian government and opposition
groups rejected
the move, and the United States
said that
it won't recognize any
self-ruled region unless
the Syrian people vote on it.
Secretary of State John Kerry
formally declared
today that the Islamic State
group is committing
genocide in Iraq and Syria, the
targets, Christians
and other minorities. Congress
and human rights
groups had pushed for the
finding, and they
set today as a deadline for the
declaration.
But the announcement doesn't
obligate the
U.S. to take any additional
action.
In Turkey, a Kurdish militant
group has claimed
responsibility for Sunday's
bombing in Ankara
that killed 37 people. The group
is an offshoot
of the main Kurdish separatist
group PKK.
And it warned that there may be
more attacks.
For their part, German officials
shuttered
their embassy in Ankara and
their consulate
in Istanbul in response to a
threat. They
called it -- quote -- "concrete
and very serious."
The European Union is wrestling
again with
how to stop the human tide
flowing out of
Turkey. A summit opened today,
but there were
signs that a tentative deal
might fall through.
Alex Thomson of Independent
Television News
is watching developments from
Greece, where
some 40,000 migrants are
stranded.
ALEX THOMSON: Still unable to
agree, European
leaders arrived in Brussels for
another two-day
summit to discuss the migration
crisis, which
saw more than 1.2 million
migrants arrive
in Europe last year.
DONALD TUSK, European Council
President: Only
if we all work together in a
coordinated manner
and keep our cool, we will
achieve success.
I am cautiously optimistic, but,
frankly speaking,
more cautious than optimistic.
ALEX THOMSON: Under the
so-called one-for-one
deal, for every Syrian refugee
just across
the water there in Turkey behind
us that gets
resettled here in Europe, a
Syria refugee
from here in Greece goes back
across the Aegean.
Now, when all this was
apparently arranged
10 days ago, the figures were
vague. Since
then, though, it's emerged that
the E.U. is
apparently only prepared to take
72,000 such
people all up, and there is no
commitment
yet beyond that figure.
Further places may be available
under a voluntary
separate scheme, but this would
require a
change to E.U. law, and getting
all 28 member
states on board is a tall order,
as the E.U.
summit chairman has
acknowledged.
But charities say the
controversial plans
are against European and
international law.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All 28 E.U.
member states must
agree to any deal.
Saudi Arabia has announced that
it's paring
back combat operations in Yemen
after nearly
a year of airstrikes and ground
combat. The
kingdom has been leading a Sunni
Arab coalition
trying to roll back gains by
Shiite rebels
in Yemen. But the air raids have
killed hundreds
of civilians. And the United
Nations today
raised the death toll to 119 in
a Saudi strike
that took place Tuesday near the
Yemeni capital
of Sanaa.
The Earth's temperature was much
higher than
usual last month. The National
Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
reports February
2016 beat the old record by
six-tenths of
a degree, a far bigger margin
than usual.
In the process, Arctic Sea ice
reached a record
low. Scientists say the heat was
partly due
to a super El Nino effect.
Automatic braking systems will
be standard
in the U.S. for most cars and
light trucks
within the next six years.
Twenty major automakers
have agreed to that voluntary
schedule today
with the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration.
U.S. drivers have nearly two
million rear-end
crashes each year.
And, on Wall Street, oil rose to
more than
$40 a barrel, and helped push
stocks higher.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 155
points to close above 17480. The
Nasdaq rose
11, and the S&P 500 added 13.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Congress
lambastes Michigan's governor
and the EPA
over the Flint water crisis; the
economics
of paying student athletes;
SeaWorld ends
its orca whale breeding program;
and much
more.
The water crisis in Flint,
Michigan, was in
the spotlight again today, this
time at a
hearing before Congress, where
the question
seemed to be, who is the most to
blame for
dangerous lead poisoning?
It was heated at times, and
there were calls
for resignations of top
officials.
Correspondent John Yang begins.
MAN: Committee on Oversight and
Government
Reform will come to order.
JOHN YANG: Michigan Governor
Rick Snyder and
EPA Administrator Gina McCarthy
took the oath,
settled into their seats, and
the grilling
began.
Democratic Congressman Elijah
Cummings started
with Republican Snyder.
REP. ELIJAH CUMMINGS (D),
Maryland: Governor
Snyder has been described as
running the state
of Michigan like a business.
There's no doubt
in my mind that, if a corporate
CEO did what
Governor Snyder's administration
has done,
he would be hauled up on
criminal charges.
JOHN YANG: An emergency manager
appointed
by Snyder's administration
switched Flint's
water supply to the Flint River
in April 2014,
in a bid to save money. But no
corrosion control
was added. That allowed lead
from aging pipes
to leach into drinking water for
more than
a year.
Snyder said today that
Michigan's Department
of Environmental Quality
repeatedly assured
him the water was safe, until
last fall.
GOV. RICK SNYDER (R), Michigan:
It was on
October 1, 2015, that I learned
that our state
experts were wrong. Flint's
water had dangerous
levels of lead. On that date, I
took immediate
action. Not a day or night goes
by that this
tragedy doesn't weigh on my
mind, the questions
I should have asked, the answers
I should
have demanded, how I could have
prevented
this.
JOHN YANG: That wasn't nearly
enough to satisfy
some on the committee.
REP. MATT CARTWRIGHT (D),
Pennsylvania: Plausible
deniability only works when it's
plausible,
and I'm not buying that you
didn't know about
any of this until October 2015.
You weren't
in a medically induced coma for
a year. And
I have had about enough of your
false contrition
and your phony apologies.
JOHN YANG: Republican Committee
Chairman Jason
Chaffetz laid blame mostly with
the Environmental
Protection Agency and its boss,
Gina McCarthy.
REP. JASON CHAFFETZ (R), Utah: I
am asking
the questions.
GINA MCCARTHY, Administrator,
Environmental
Protection Agency: OK.
REP. JASON CHAFFETZ: Yes, OK. In
February
is when you first arrived on the
scene, and
it wasn't until January of next
year that
you actually you did something.
That's the
fundamental problem. Don't look
around like
you're mystified. That's what
happened. You
didn't take action. You didn't.
And you could
have pulled that switch.
GINA MCCARTHY: We consistently
took action
from that point forward,
consistently.
REP. JASON CHAFFETZ: There are a
lot of people
in this audience from Flint.
Nobody believes
that you took action. You had
the presence,
you had the authority, you had
the backing
of the federal government, and
you didn't
act when you had the chance. And
if you're
going to do the courageous
thing, you too
should step down.
JOHN YANG: McCarthy blamed the
state for giving
the EPA bad information and
maintained she
did everything within her legal
authority
to respond.
GINA MCCARTHY: We just couldn't
get a straight
answer anywhere. People don't
deserve that
out of their government. I will
take responsibility
for not pushing hard enough, but
I will not
take responsibility for causing
this problem.
It wasn't EPA at the helm when
this happened.
JOHN YANG: The issue of lead in
water also
affects communities from Ohio to
North Carolina,
from Mississippi to New Jersey.
Governor Snyder
today urged Congress to approve
$220 million
for replacing contaminated pipes
in Flint
and in other cities. And he said
he wants
Michigan to spend a similar
amount.
PROTESTERS: No justice, no
peace!
JOHN YANG: But some Flint
residents who attended
today's hearing said that's not
good enough,
given Michigan's budget surplus
of $575 million.
NAKIYA WAKES, Flint Resident: I
was hearing
stuff in Snyder's testimony
today. We was
never told about any of this
until January
of 2016. He has ignored Flint
and all warnings.
Then he says that he has money
put up for
a rainy day fund. Well, it's
pouring. Where
is the money at?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: Lead levels in
Flint's water are
dropping, but they still don't
meet federal
drinking water standards. That
means city
residents will continue to use
bottled water
for the foreseeable future.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's pick up
further on these
questions of what mistakes were
made and by
whom in Flint, as well as
growing concerns
about the safety of water in
other communities.
David Shepardson, a Michigan
native, has been
reporting on Flint and watching
the latest
developments for Reuters. And
Marc Edwards,
he is a civil and environmental
engineer and
professor at Virginia Tech
University. He's
widely credited with helping to
expose the
Flint water problems. He
testified before
the same House committee earlier
this week.
And we welcome you both.
David Shepardson, to you first.
You get the impression from
listening to this
hearing today that everybody
involved bears
some responsibility. Is that
accurate?
DAVID SHEPARDSON, Reuters: I
think everybody
admits that things didn't go
well, i mean,
the state, the local
authorities.
And the EPA has probably a
little bit different
position, that they do not admit
specific
wrongdoing. All they admit, they
didn't act
fast enough. In fact, the agency
yesterday
released about 1,200 pages of
e-mails that
show that, as far back as
September, the administrator
asked her deputies whether it
was appropriate
the intervene.
And she said that this could get
big very
quickly. So, certainly, the
agency knew that
this was a growing issue of
concern, but they
didn't opt to take the step of
issuing an
emergency order to intervene
until January
of this year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, given that,
is there one
individual or one agency that
bears more responsibility
than others?
DAVID SHEPARDSON: Well, I guess
it depends
on your point of view.
The main problem was that the
state failed
to add corrosion control to the
water, and
the EPA would say, and the state
would agree,
that they didn't inform the EPA
of this for
months and months. And because
of that, that
catastrophic decision led to the
ultimate
poisoning of the water, but from
there, depending
on what political party you're
in, it really
-- the splitting of the blame
depends on your
point of view.
That's really what the last two
hearings have
been largely about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's impossible
to separate
it from the politics, but we
will try.
Professor Marc Edwards, you were
asked to
go in and look at the Flint
water situation,
what, almost a year ago by a
family that lived
there. What would you add to
where the responsibility
lies here?
MARC EDWARDS, Virginia Tech
University: Well,
it's very clear that Governor
Snyder was guilty
of not listening to the
complaints of residents
in Flint.
And he was guilty of being
overly trusting
of the Michigan Department of
Environmental
Quality and the EPA. And he's
accepted that
blame. He called it his Katrina.
And he also
now wants to be part of the
solution, but
I think the thing that concerns
me most is
EPA's testimony, which I find to
be outrageous
and Orwellian.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In what way?
MARC EDWARDS: Well, I mean, for
example, they
said the EPA whistle-blower's
memo that blew
the lid off this back in July
was inconclusive,
when, in fact, it proved that
the entire city
was in danger.
EPA today claimed that they
didn't know if
they could enforce federal law.
EPA didn't
know if they could enforce
federal law or
not. They said also that they
were strong-armed
by the state. I mean, how can
you be strong-armed
by someone you're supposed to be
supervising?
And even more outrageous is,
they have claimed
that they warned Flint residents
in July that
the water wasn't safe to drink,
when, in fact,
when Virginia Tech, our team,
tried to warn
people in July, August and
September that
the water was unsafe, we had to
fight the
EPA.
EPA said nothing to back us up.
So they are
a major part of what went wrong
in Flint,
and for them to sit there and
act like they
have done nothing wrong is just,
again, outrageous
and Orwellian.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we should
point out that
we did invite the EPA to
participate in the
discussion tonight to come on
for an interview,
and they declined our request.
And this story goes on, but, for
right now,
David Shepardson, in Flint, the
problem has
gotten a little bit better, but
it continues.
Is that right?
DAVID SHEPARDSON: Right.
And there's -- so there's two
funding issues
right now. The water is not yet
safe to drink,
and there are still -- the EPA
is still doing
tests, and there are still many
people who
are forced to use bottled water
for cooking
and drinking.
But both the state -- the
governor has asked
the state legislature to fund
another $160
million over two years, and
there's another
fight in Congress over whether
the federal
government should kick in about
$220 million
for Flint and other cities
struggling with
lead in pipes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that to be
resolved.
Professor Edwards, though, while
we're talking
about this, we know that you
have written
that there are a number of older
American
cities that are confronting very
similar problems
to what Flint has experienced.
Where are we
talking about exactly in this
country?
MARC EDWARDS: Well, you're
talking about all
the major U.S. cities that have
lead pipe,
where it's acknowledged that the
example to
meet intent of this rule, 70
percent of those
cities would have to tell people
that the
water is unsafe.
So, we have been arguing this
with EPA for
10 years, warning them that
something like
Flint was going to happen. And
the only thing
that's really unusual here is
that they got
caught in Flint. A group of
outsiders exposed
that children were getting lead
poisoning,
even as MDQ and EPA were
claiming the water's
safe.
To this day, EPA and MDQ have
not admitted
that the water broke federal
law.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much of the
rest of the
country should be worrying about
this?
MARC EDWARDS: Well, I think what
you're going
to do is, when you start turning
over rocks
and looking for what's going on
with lead
in drinking water in this
country, something
slimy is going to crawl out
every time.
You're seeing that in New Jersey
now. You're
seeing it in Chicago,
Philadelphia, Jackson.
I mean, EPA has known about this
problem for
10 years, and it's done nothing.
And we have
been screaming at EPA to try to
stop something
like Flint from happening.
JUDY WOODRUFF: When you say we,
you mean you
and those folks who are working
with you on
this?
MARC EDWARDS: Yes.
No, there were several us in
Washington, D.C.,
who saw how this attitude of EPA
that anything
goes in terms of cheating on
measuring lead
in water, so that it looks low
when you sample
it, but it could be high when
people are drinking
the water, it was leaving --
it's left all
Americans in harm's way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dave Shepardson,
how well-prepared
are America's cities, states and
the EPA to
deal with what apparently is a
much bigger
problem than anybody realized?
DAVID SHEPARDSON: It's a
staggering issue.
There are about 155,000 water
systems the
EPA enforces. The vast majority
of states
are the primary ones overseeing
these water
systems. And by the EPA's
estimate, over the
next 20 years, the water
infrastructure of
the country needs at least $600
billion in
investments.
So -- and there have been
numerous reports
recently of the lead problems in
Mississippi
and Pennsylvania and throughout
the country.
And, as Mark said, clearly,
Flint has cast
attention on it, but it's not
just lead in
water, but it's also lead in
paint and other
sources. The lead issue for
children across
the country, it goes far beyond
certainly
Flint.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
to what extent
is this an issue that is a
priority before
the Congress and the
administration?
DAVID SHEPARDSON: Well, Michigan
Senator Debbie
Stabenow was on the floor today
complaining
that they didn't reach a deal
before the Senate
goes on a two-week recess, and
there is going
to be more fighting.
But remember that's it's also an
issue in
the presidential campaign, that
both Bernie
Sanders and Hillary Clinton have
called for
Governor Snyder to resign. And I
do think
the issue of infrastructure and
funding for
cities like Flint is going to
continue to
be an issue throughout the
campaign season.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we
certainly need to
continue to watch this, and we
will do that.
David Shepardson, we thank you.
And, Professor Marc Edwards at
Virginia Tech,
thank you.
DAVID SHEPARDSON: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Supreme Court
nominee Merrick
Garland made the trek to Capitol
Hill today.
President Obama's selection for
the Supreme
Court made his first official
visit, meeting
with key Senate Democrats.
For more, we're joined by NPR
congressional
correspondent Ailsa Chang. She
joins us from
Capitol Hill.
Hello, Ailsa.
So, tell us, what sort of a
reception did
Judge Garland get?
AILSA CHANG, NPR: Well, today,
because it
was the two Democrats, he got an
overwhelmingly
positive reception.
But that was what was so
conspicuous, is that
today's visit to Capitol Hill
was just made
up of two appointments with two
key Democrats.
Usually, when a Supreme Court
nominee arrives
on the Hill, the first people he
or she meets
are the top two Senate leaders,
one in each
party, and the top senators on
the Judiciary
Committee of each party.
So, today, because he only met
with Minority
Leader Harry Reid and the
ranking member or
top Democrat on the Judiciary
Committee, Patrick
Leahy, it wasn't quite the
reception that
we're usually used to seeing for
Supreme Court
nominees on the Hill.
Neither Senate Majority Leader
Mitch McConnell
nor the Judiciary chair,
Grassley, Chuck Grassley,
were on his schedule today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Any word, Ailsa,
on how these
meetings went, or were they
purely formalities?
AILSA CHANG: They're usually a
formality.
They're very ceremonial. There's
this gracious
affair. They're mostly a photo
opportunity.
The question now is, how many
meetings will
he actually get with Republican
senators in
the weeks ahead? He actually
spoke on the
phone with Senate Majority
Leader Mitch McConnell
yesterday. McConnell, through
his spokesperson,
told everybody that he wanted,
he preferred
to speak to Garland on the phone
because he
didn't want to put Garland
through the unnecessary
political routines, and that he
wanted to
inform him that he will not get
a face-to-face
meeting with the Senate majority
leader, because
Garland will not get a
confirmation vote this
year, according to the Senate
majority leader.
But he said that he did wish
Garland well.
Now, Chairman Chuck Grassley --
at least the
White House yesterday said that
Grassley's
office had said that Grassley
would -- planned
to meet with the nominee in a
couple weeks
after the Senate recess.
But Grassley this morning made
it very clear
that he made no such promise,
that when he
spoke to Garland personally on
the phone yesterday,
he said Garland should call him
back after
the recess is over and check in
with him again,
and they would decide how to go
forward from
there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
Now, a few Republican senators
have said that
they will meet with him. Is that
right? Just
a handful.
AILSA CHANG: Just a handful,
about five or
six.
Susan Collins of Maine, who has
been known
for a long time to be a
moderate, from the
very outset, she said that she
thinks that
the nominee, whomever Obama
picks, should
get a full confirmation process,
should get
a full confirmation hearing,
should get a
confirmation vote. So it's no
surprise that
she reiterated this week that
she would meet
with Merrick Garland.
Three senators that are running
in battleground
states in 2016 said that they
would go ahead
and meet with Garland, Kelly
Ayotte of New
Hampshire, Rob Portman of Ohio,
and Mark Kirk
of Illinois. Kirk had said also
from nearly
the outset that he thinks
Obama's nominee
should get a full confirmation
hearing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, again, these
are senators
who are facing -- they're having
to compete
in states where the Democrats
have some chance,
so they're feeling a little bit
of a different
atmosphere back home.
Ailsa, what exactly then does
Merrick Garland
face? Are we just looking at
weeks and months
of no contact at all with the
Senate?
AILSA CHANG: I mean, it -- well,
he will certainly
-- he will certainly coming up
to the Hill
for many, many meetings with
Democrats, but
the question is, how many more
Republicans
will agree to these meetings?
Now, if you talk to Chuck
Schumer of New York,
he says that the ice is
breaking, the fact
that five or six Republican
senators are saying
now that they will meet with the
nominee shows
that there are many more
Republican senators
who are going to crack, because
it's just
untenable that -- the position
they're taking.
That is sort of the hope that
Democrats are
expressing right now.
But it's really going to be up
to the Senate
Democrats to try to keep this
issue alive,
especially now we're going into
a two-week
recess. You know, it means
calling up press
events. It means getting their
grassroots
efforts out there, continuing to
push this
into the public eye, and getting
reporters
like me to keep writing about a
story -- about
this story, because if the story
ceases to
change, it's hard to keep
justifying coverage
of it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's an
unprecedented
situation, at least in our
modern -- in my
memory. I don't remember
anything like this.
Ailsa Chang with NPR, thank you
very much.
AILSA CHANG: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Millions of
viewers began tuning
into college basketball's March
Madness games
today. Billions of dollars are
paid for the
TV rights.
Last year, an average of 11
million people
tuned in throughout the month.
And yet one
question looms larger than ever:
Should the
players be entitled to further
compensation?
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman,
explores the issues this would
raise. It's
part of his weekly Making Sense
report, which
airs Thursdays on the
"NewsHour."
ED O'BANNON, Former UCLA
Basketball Player:
I saw myself on a video game.
PAUL SOLMAN: Former UCLA star Ed
O'Bannon,
MVP of the 1995 NCAA Finals.
ED O'BANNON: It was pretty cool
to watch.
I mean, the guy was left-handed,
bald-headed.
The jumper was good. So, I was
very pleased
about it.
(LAUGHTER)
PAUL SOLMAN: But the friend who
showed O'Bannon
the game was puzzled.
ED O'BANNON: What's funny about
it is, he
says, we paid X-amount of
dollars for it,
for the video game, and you
didn't get one
penny.
PAUL SOLMAN: It was this
encounter that sparked
a famous firestorm, Ed
O'Bannon's eventual
2009 lawsuits against the NCAA
and video game
maker EA Sports for blatant and
unlawful use
of student athlete likenesses to
increase
sales and profits, while denying
college athletes
any share of the revenues they
generated,
besides a full-tuition sports
scholarship.
ED O'BANNON: Close to 15 years
later, and
they're still making money off
of my image.
I just thought to myself,
there's got to be
something wrong about this. If I
was an entertainer
of any other sort, would I have
these same
things happened to me, you know?
PAUL SOLMAN: No. You would get
royalties,
residuals.
ED O'BANNON: Absolutely.
PAUL SOLMAN: We'd come to find
out what's
happened to Ed O'Bannon and his
suit, landing
in Las Vegas, passing the Strip,
more decked-out
than ever, winding up in
Henderson, Nevada,
where O'Bannon works, lives, and
helps coach
basketball at Liberty High
School.
He now coaches the NCAA-ers of
tomorrow, who,
if they're absurdly good and
lucky, will play
in a Final Four themselves
someday. The rights
paid to the NCAA to broadcast
the tournament
this year? Nearly a billion
dollars. The players'
take? Still zero.
New York Times columnist Joe
Nocera has long
made the case for paying
so-called student
athletes. It's starkly laid out
in his new
book, "Indentured."
JOE NOCERA, Author,
"Indentured": They are
fundamentally exploited by a
system that makes
not millions of dollars, but
billions of dollars,
and that enriches everybody
around them except
themselves.
PAUL SOLMAN: But athletes, if
they make it,
make millions of dollars.
JOE NOCERA: Sure. The very small
5 percent
who make it from college to the
pros will
get -- will get very rich. What
about the
other 95 percent?
PAUL SOLMAN: O'Bannon became one
of the 5
percent. And yet, in college, he
often went
hungry for lack of cash.
ED O'BANNON: There were many
nights when I
went through the night without
eating.
PAUL SOLMAN: You?
ED O'BANNON: Oh, absolutely.
MAN: It's simple, gentlemen. The
little things
is what's going to win us the
game.
PAUL SOLMAN: Back at Liberty
High, the coaches
were prepping the Patriots for a
playoff game.
ED O'BANNON: Do what got us
here. Have some
fun. Keep us winning.
(APPLAUSE)
PAUL SOLMAN: Kyle Thaxton is one
of the team's
stars. Should college athletes
get paid?
KYLE THAXTON, Student: If
they're the ones
playing and doing it on the
court, then they
should be the ones getting paid
also. It shouldn't
just be the coaches.
PAUL SOLMAN: Coaches who can
make $6 million
a year or more. And it's not
just pay.
RAMOGI HUMA, Former UCLA
Football Player:
In NCAA sports, you have players
who can be
stuck with sports-related
medical expenses.
PAUL SOLMAN: Ramogi Huma, who
played football
at UCLA, has been doing the
lonely work of
organizing players.
RAMOGI HUMA: Injured players can
lose their
scholarships. Graduation rates
hover around
50 percent amongst the sports
who are generating
this money, and the NCAA's
refusing to adopt
the same concussion reforms that
the NFL has
adopted.
We're not advocating for
professional salaries
and things like that, but we're
saying that,
look, some of that value should
be given in
the form of basic protections
like medical
expenses and degree completion.
PAUL SOLMAN: NCAA President Mark
Emmert declined
an interview, but we caught up
with him at
a press conference.
Why not pay college athletes?
MARK EMMERT, President, NCAA:
Because they're
students and they're not
employees. At the
end of the day, you know, young
men and women
come to college because they
want to get an
education, because they want to
participate
in their sport as part of that
educational
experience.
PAUL SOLMAN: We relayed Emmert's
response
to Ed O'Bannon.
ED O'BANNON: The way that they
run their business
-- and that's what they're
doing, they are
running a business -- you can't
possibly do
that and think that your
employees, because
these athletes are employees,
they aren't
-- they shouldn't get paid. That
to me is
mind-boggling.
PAUL SOLMAN: But it was time for
the tipoff.
In the playoff game, the home
team seemed
comfortably ahead. But big-time
college sports
is rarely comfortable, says Joe
Nocera.
JOE NOCERA: Really, being an
athlete on a
campus is a full-time job. The
NCAA rules
say it's only supposed to be 20
hours a week,
but if you go on a road trip,
they only count
the time you're on the floor.
So, when you're
in the airplane, when you're in
the hotel,
that doesn't count.
PAUL SOLMAN: And on campus:
JOE NOCERA: You have
weightlifting in the
morning. Then you go to some
classes. Then
you have got practice. Then you
have got more
strength training. Then you have
got enforced
study hall. You know, you go to
bed at midnight,
you get up at 6:00, you do the
whole thing
all over. It's a full-time job.
And not only that. Let's be
honest. There's
a cartel that is suppressing the
wages of
a labor force, if you want to
think about
it in economic terms.
PAUL SOLMAN: "Cartel?" we asked
the NCAA's
Emmert.
MARK EMMERT: He's allowed his
opinions.
PAUL SOLMAN: Turns out it's not
just the NCAA
that has a problem paying
players, though.
Cardozo Law School Professor
Ekow Yankah:
EKOW YANKAH, Cardozo Law School:
The more
and more we treat them as young
minor league
professional athletes, the
further they will
get from the other things that
we find valuable
about college.
PAUL SOLMAN: Or, as Liberty High
senior Kahlil
Derouen put it:
KAHLIL DEROUEN, Student: We
don't want the
importance of being a student to
be diminished
more.
PAUL SOLMAN: Moreover, Ekow
Yankah asks, if
you pay basketball, football and
baseball
players:
EKOW YANKAH: What does that mean
for our water
polo team? What does that mean
for volleyball?
There is a dangerous line here
where the very
natural thing to do would be to
have three
revenue-generating sports and
get rid of all
the others.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, Professor
Yankah has an alternative
for athletes who aren't
students.
EKOW YANKAH: If there are young
people who
are not at all interested in
being student
athletes, and their life's
project is to develop
their particular athletic
talent, there ought
to be professional developmental
leagues into
which they can go.
PAUL SOLMAN: Right now, of
course, the main
option for young basketball
players remains
going to an NCAA college.
Do almost all of them think they
are going
pro, that is, people who play in
Division
I college, let's say?
ED O'BANNON: In my experience,
yes.
PAUL SOLMAN: And it's a delusion
right?
ED O'BANNON: It's a delusion,
but I think
it's the right delusion. You
have to think
you're going to go in order to
get there.
PAUL SOLMAN: OK, so what
happened to O'Bannon's
Liberty Patriots? Hoop dreams
dashed, theirs
and by this time ours, they
wound up losing
67-61.
ED O'BANNON: As the coaching
staff, we tip
our hats to you guys, because
you played hard
all season.
MAN: What you guys did today and
these previous
four years, you will get to
further your education,
and get it paid for. That's the
goal.
PAUL SOLMAN: And maybe even
getting paid extra
in cash.
And so, in the end, what's
happened to the
lawsuits? Well, EA Sports
actually settled
for roughly $60 million, with
thousands of
players, past and present,
getting, on average,
about $1,600 each, the money
finally awarded
just this week.
In 2014, the court ruled the
NCAA's refusal
to pay players was an antitrust
violation,
and also ordered up to $5,000
per student
athlete be put in trust for
using their likenesses.
But the NCAA appealed, and the
money award
was reversed.
And so, this Tuesday, O'Bannon's
lawyers asked
the Supreme Court to review the
case.
In Henderson, Nevada, this is
economics correspondent
Paul Solman for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: The popular theme
park SeaWorld
has been under ever-growing
criticism for
the way it breeds and shows its
popular orca
whales.
Now SeaWorld is bowing to
pressure and making
a big change.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: Orca whales have
been entertaining
audiences at SeaWorld parks
since 1964. Once
feared -- they're commonly known
as killer
whales -- they have become
hugely popular
and even beloved.
Today's announcement, made with
the Humane
Society, means the era of public
exhibition
is, gradually at least, coming
to an end.
JOEL MANBY, CEO and President,
SeaWorld: Current
orcas under our care will be the
last generation
at SeaWorld. We're going to
phase out our
theatrical shows.
JEFFREY BROWN: SeaWorld is
ending its breeding
program for the animals, though
it's keeping
the whales it already has.
And the Orlando-based company
says the shows
will give way to what it calls
inspiring natural
orca encounters. Animal rights
activists have
long criticized keeping the
animals in captivity.
WOMAN: Any of us would be
miserable if we
had to spend out life living in
a bathtub.
And orcas at SeaWorld are just
as miserable.
They spend their lives confined
to tiny tanks,
where they go mad from
confinement and boredom.
JEFFREY BROWN: The parks came
under new scrutiny
in 2010 after one of the whales
drowned a
trainer. That attack later
became the peg
for 2013's "Blackfish," a
documentary examining
the effects of captivity on
killer whales.
The company also faced
regulatory and legislative
efforts to ban orca captivity.
And ticket
sales to the parks have dropped
significantly.
And we're joined now by the man
who made today's
announcement, SeaWorld CEO and
president Joel
Manby, and by Wayne Pacelle, CEO
of the Humane
Society of the United States, a
longtime critic
of SeaWorld that worked with it
on the new
reform measures.
Welcome to both of you.
Joel Manby, let me start with
you.
Is this an acknowledgment that
raising and
using the whales for public
exhibition has
been wrong?
JOEL MANBY, CEO and President,
SeaWorld: Jeffrey,
what's really clear to me -- I
have been CEO
for about 11 months now -- is
that society
has shifted.
And people's view of having
these majestic,
very large animals under human
care has changed
over time. And more and more
people are becoming
uncomfortable with it.
And I had to make some difficult
decisions
to move the company forward, and
I felt that
the right thing to do for the
company and
all things considered is to end
our breeding
program.
JEFFREY BROWN: The right thing
to do for the
company, so should it be seen
mostly as a
business decision?
JOEL MANBY: You know what? I
think any business
in today's world has to be
connected to a
core set of values.
And our core set of values is to
help animals
in the wild. And a lot of people
don't maybe
realize that about SeaWorld, but
we have the
best zoological organization, I
think, in
the world. We're passionate
about animals.
We're passionate about animals
in the wild.
And I felt that the orca issue
was an overhang
for us that was stopping our
incredible story
from being told to a country
that's changing.
And I think it's great that the
millennials,
the younger folks care about
conservation,
they care about animals. We do,
too, and I
wanted them to hear our story
more and more.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so Wayne
Pacelle, as
I said, a longtime critic of
SeaWorld, now
working with them, what do you
see as the
importance of this move, and
what would a
move towards a more educational
or more natural
approach be? What do you want to
see happen
now?
WAYNE PACELLE, President and
CEO, Humane Society
of the United States: Well, we
celebrate the
end of breeding of orcas in
activity. This
has been a long-held aspiration
for the Humane
Society of the U.S. and so many
other groups
in our field.
Obviously, the atmospherics on
this issue
changed dramatically after the
airing of "Blackfish."
In terms of these animals, they
are obviously
long-lived animals. They are
going to be around
if they are not released into
the wild. And
there are obviously a whole set
of challenges
if that were to be contemplated.
We obviously are very focused on
the idea
of an orca-centric experience,
that the trainers
are allowing them to exhibit
their natural
behaviors, that they're
exercised, that within
the captive setting, there's
enrichment.
It's a great challenge, with
these highly
intelligent, complex, sociable
animals who
live in pods in the wild. We
think there's
a ceiling in terms of how much
can be done
for them, but obviously SeaWorld
and its staff
need to do their best to
accommodate their
needs.
JEFFREY BROWN: What about, Mr.
Pacelle, staying
with you, going -- I wonder if
you would go
further, because your
organization has also
been critical of keeping
dolphins in captivity.
Are you pushing SeaWorld to go
there? Do you
expect this to continue to
something like
that any time soon?
WAYNE PACELLE: Well, we think
there's actually
a very artful solution, which
is, if SeaWorld
has continuing needs for animals
to populate
its expeditions, if they can get
animals who
are beached or otherwise in
distress from
the wild and those animals can
be brought
in, rehabilitated and in some
cases, if they
cannot be re-released, then they
can meet
those needs.
And that is a de facto
sanctuary. That's what
big cat sanctuaries and chimp
sanctuaries
and lots of other animal-based
do. Some animals simply can't be
released
into the wild again. And a lot
of very progressive
zoos and others are relying on
rescues to
populate their exhibits.
So, we hope that's the direction
of SeaWorld
in the years ahead.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, what about
that, Mr.
Manby, because...
JOEL MANBY: If I could....
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, go ahead. I
want to get
your response on where you see
this going,
and why not, if there's cultural
shifts, move
to other animals like dolphins?
JOEL MANBY: Well, a point that
Wayne made
that is very important -- a lot
of people
don't realize it -- is that
there is a tremendous
need for rescue operations, and
the capacity
is much lower than the demand.
And one of the things I
announced today was,
SeaWorld is committing $50
million over the
next five years, with a goal of
being the
largest rescue organization in
the world.
And just in the last year, we
rescue seven
animals a day, 1,000 dolphins
stranded last
year alone. There's hundreds and
hundreds
of sea lions in California that
we save.
This good work can't continue
unless SeaWorld
has the expertise and the
facilities.
JEFFREY BROWN: Is there, Mr.
Manby -- with
the orcas, you have said you --
it would be
dangerous to release the ones
you have.
What about, though, on a
case-by-case basis
or moving them, transferring
them to some
kind of transitional area?
JOEL MANBY: Yes.
You know, this is something that
actually
Wayne and I have talked a lot
about. We don't
always agree on everything, and
we won't,
but we're trying to look for
common ground.
And the truth is, any research
you read, any
peer-reviewed research, a whale
that's born
into human care is not a good
candidate for
release.
In fact, in the history of
mankind, no whale
or dolphin born under human care
has been
released successfully. The only
time it has
been done successfully, if
they're wild, they're
brought in for a short period of
time and
released.
We have four whales that were
taken from the
wild over 35 years ago. They're
quite old
now. They have been under human
care for a
long, long time. We don't think
it's worth
the risk for those four whales.
JEFFREY BROWN: Mr. Pacelle, just
in our last
minute, I want to ask you about
the largest
context here. Do you see this as
part of a
movement, in the way that zoos
and aquariums
and all look at the treatment of
animals,
movies, and so a much larger
cultural shift
here?
WAYNE PACELLE: No question.
I have got a book coming out
next month called
"The Humane Economy," and my
argument is that
business and commerce must marry
itself with
these emergent values about
animals and their
well-being.
It was March last year we saw
Ringling Brothers
give up its traveling elephant
acts. We have
seen movies migrate away from
live animals
to computer-generated imagery.
We're seeing
changes in the food sector,
where companies
like Wal-Mart or Kroger or
McDonald's are
now buying their products that
come from more
humane farms.
This is a cultural-wide shift.
And this happens
to be one manifestation, with a
live entertainment
company like SeaWorld getting on
board. We're
happy about that, but we're very
happy about
the broader trends in society.
JOEL MANBY: You think about, for
20 years,
we have been adversaries, really
monologuing
against each other. Now we're
dialoguing.
And I think the winner is
animals in the wild
and in their habitats. And let's
focus there,
because the crisis is bigger
than any organization
can handle. And we can do more
together than
if we fight all the time. So, I
think it's
a good move.
JEFFREY BROWN: Joel Manby and
Wayne Pacelle,
thank you both very much.
JOEL MANBY: Thank you.
WAYNE PACELLE: Thank you,
Jeffrey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now an editorial
note.
In our report Tuesday night on a
North Carolina
family that's supporting Donald
Trump, we
were continuing a long
"NewsHour" tradition
of talking directly to voters.
We want to
hear from them, in their own
voices, speaking
about what motivates their
political preferences.
Regrettably, none of us at the
"NewsHour"
recognized the questions that
could arise
from Grace Tilly's tattoos. And
we didn't
raise them with her until after
the report
aired.
At that point, our producer
contacted Ms.
Tilly, and she insisted the
tattoos are religious
in nature, and have nothing to
do with a neo-Nazi
theme or white supremacy.
We referenced her comments in an
editor's
note posted on our Web site.
Well, many of our online
commenters have since
let us know that they reject
that explanation.
We're now posting this note as a
follow-up.
We at the "NewsHour" remain
committed to being
as transparent as possible in
covering this
election.
And we will be back in just a
moment.
But, first, we ask you to take
this time to
hear from your local PBS
station. It's a chance
to offer your support, which
helps keep programs
like ours on the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a news
update.
Senator Bernie Sanders has
conceded the Democratic
presidential primary in Missouri
to Hillary
Senator Bernie Sanders has
conceded the Democratic
presidential primary in Missouri
to Hillary
Clinton after the AP declared
her the winner.
He trailed by only about 1,500
votes, but
Clinton after the AP declared
her the winner.
He trailed by only about 1,500
votes, but
says he will not seek a recount.
The Republican
race in Missouri remains too
close to call
says he will not seek a recount.
The Republican
race in Missouri remains too
close to call
between Donald Trump and Ted
Cruz.
And U.S. officials confirm that
North Korea
has test-fired another ballistic
missile.
And U.S. officials confirm that
North Korea
has test-fired another ballistic
missile.
It comes a day after the U.S.
imposed new
sanctions for earlier nuclear
and missile
It comes a day after the U.S.
imposed new
sanctions for earlier nuclear
and missile
tests.
And that
is the "NewsHour" for tonight.
On Friday, we will look at eye
in
the sky and
the myriad of ethical questions
surrounding
drone warfare.
the sky and
the myriad of ethical questions
surrounding
drone warfare.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening
with Mark Shields and David
Brooks.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening
with Mark Shields and David
Brooks.
For
all of us
at the "PBS NewsHour," thank
you, and good
night.
at the "PBS NewsHour," thank
you, and good
night.